Part Two (104, 4–108, 12)
Humanity (104, 4–18)
What, then, is the form of fluid matter? A cause, which is the blindness that
derives from the powers…in it all of them…as they procreate together with
them, and [perish]. The thought placed between those on the [right and] those on
the left is a power of [simulation], <so that> all the things that the…desire to do,
with the result that they bring them forth in the same way that a shadow is
projected by a body it follows; these <are> the roots of the visible creations.
The Creation of the Human (104, 18–106, 25)
Now, the whole establishment and organization of the images, likenesses, and
imitations has come into being for the sake of those who need nourishment,
instruction, and form, so that their smallness may gradually grow, as through the
instruction provided by the image of a mirror. That, in fact, is why he created
the human last, after having prepared and provided for him the things that he
created for his sake.
The creation of the human happened in the same way as everything else. The
spiritual Word set it invisibly going, accomplishing it by means of the demiurge
 and his subservient angels, who were joined in their modeling by the
presumptuous thought and its rulers. Thus, the human became like an earthly
shadow, so that he would be of the same kind as [those who are] cut off from
the members of the All, and a creature made by them all, the ones on the right as
well as the ones on the left, each of the orders forming [the human just as] it
itself was. For the [form] that the Word brought forth [was] deficient in such a

way that he was [afflicted] by sickness. It did not resemble him, for he brought
him forth into [oblivion], ignorance,…, and all the other sicknesses, having
given him only the first form.
Now, the Word <gave him something> through the demiurge, without his
knowledge, to let him know that there exists something higher and realize that he
needed [it]. This is what the prophet called “the breath of life,”45 and…of the
superior aeon, and this is the living soul that gave life to the substance that was
dead at first. For that which is dead is ignorance.
We must, therefore, conclude that the soul of the first human derives from
the spiritual Word, even if the creator thought that it was his, because that which
was breathed went through him as through a mouth.
The creator himself also sent down souls out of his own substance, since [he]
too has the ability to procreate,  <being> derived from the likeness of the
Father. And those on the left as well produced a sort of human being of their
own, since they possess the imitation <…>.
The spiritual substance is one and a single image;…its sickness is the
condition…form. As for the substance of those who are psychical, its condition
is double, because it has an understanding of what is superior, and confesses it,
but it is <also> inclined toward evil on account of the inclination of the
presumptuous thought. And as far as the material substance is concerned, its
impulses are diverse and take many forms. It was a sickness that assumed many
kinds of inclinations.
The first human, then, is a mixed molding and a mixed creation, and a
depository of those on the left and those on the right, as well as of a spiritual
Word, and his sentiments are divided between each of the two substances to
which he owes his existence.
Paradise and the Transgression of the First Human (106, 25–108, 12)
Because of this, it is also said that a paradise was planted for him, that he might
eat from the fruit of three kinds of trees; it was a garden of the threefold order,
and one that provides pleasures. The noble and distinctive substance in him
was much superior to <the> creation, and <was> a blow to them. For that reason,
they issued a commandment, threatening him, and they brought over him great
danger:  death. Only the food of the bad trees did he allow him to eat and
enjoy, whereas from that tree which had the double character [he] was not
allowed to eat—and much less from that of life—in order that [he] might not
acquire an honor [equal to] themselves, and also so that [he] should not…them.
Through the evil power called “the serpent”—for he is more crafty than all

the other evil powers—the human <was> deceived, by a decision of those who
belong to the remembrance and the desires. It made him transgress the
commandment, so that he should die. And he was expelled from that place and
all its pleasures.
This is the expulsion they made him suffer, when he was expelled from the
pleasures of those who belong to the imitation and those who belong to the
likeness. It is, however, a work of providence, in order that it may be realized
that the enjoyment the human being may have for such pleasures is short
compared with the eternal existence of the place of rest. It was a work the Spirit
had ordained, because it had planned in advance that the human should
experience that great evil which is death—that is, the complete ignorance of all
things—and also experience all the evils that arise from that, so that he, after the
cravings and anxieties that result from these, might partake of the greatest
good, namely, eternal life, which is the complete knowledge of the All and the
partaking of all good things.
Because of the transgression of the first human, death reigned. It
accompanied all humans in order to kill them as long as its [rule] remained,
which it possessed and was given [for a] kingdom because of <the> economy of
the Father’s Will, of which we have spoken before.
