Part Three (108, 13–138, 27)

                    Confusion in the World, Errors of Greeks
                       and Barbarians (108, 13–110, 22)
Whenever the two orders, [those] on the right and those on the left, are brought
together by means of that thought which lies between them and gives them a
common economy, it comes to pass that both of them perform their works with
the same zeal, those on the right copying those on the left and those on the left
also copying those on the right. Sometimes the evil order begins, in a foolish
fashion, to work some evil, and the <wise> order emulates it in the shape of a
malefactor, it too doing evil as if it were a power of evil. At other times the wise
order sets out to do good, and the <foolish> order emulates it so as to do the
same.
    This is how it is with the things that are constituted in this way by such
deeds: they have come into being resembling things that are dissimilar, so that it
has become impossible for the uninstructed to understand the cause of the things
that exist. Because of that, they have put forward different explanations. Some
say that the existing things exist by providence; these are the ones who observe
the regularity of the movement of the creation and its reliability. Others say that
it is something alien; these are the ones who observe the <diversity> and the
lawlessness of the powers and its evil character. Others again say that the
existing things are what are destined to be; these are the ones who have occupied
themselves with this matter. Others yet again say that it is in accordance with
nature; and still others say that is accidental. The great majority, however, have
only reached as far as the visible elements and know of nothing more than these.
     Those who have become wise among the Greeks and the barbarians have
reached as far as the powers that came into being from illusion and a vain
thought, <as well as> those who issued from these in turn by way of strife and in
the manner of rebellion, and those powers have worked in them. Thus, when
they spoke about the things they held to be “wisdom,” it was imitation,
presumption, and illusory ideas, for the <imitation> had deceived them: they
thought that they had reached the truth,  though it was error they had
reached. This was not only because the names they were using were small, but
the powers themselves prevented them by giving the impression that they were
the All.
     From this it happened that this order was entangled in a struggle against
itself, because of the presumptuous quarrelsomeness of…of the ruler who is…
who is before him. For this reason, nobody agreed with anybody else about
anything, either in philosophy, medicine, rhetoric, music, or mechanics, but these
are all opinions and theories. Consequently, <verbosity> ruled, and <they> were
confused, since they were at a loss to explain <those> who ruled and gave them
their ideas.

                  The Insights of the Hebrews (110, 22–113, 1)
With regard to the things that have arisen from the <people> of the Hebrews, the
scriptures <…> from the material powers <whose> model the Greeks
<reproduce>, everything they thought so as to speak it, the powers on the right
<…>, who moved them all to think <by means of> words and a likeness of
themselves. So they set out to reach the truth, and used the mixed powers that
were working in them.
    After that, they reached the order of the unmixed powers, <before> they
reached the single one who is set up after the likeness of the Father—he is not
invisible  in his nature, but is veiled in wisdom so as to reproduce the type
of the truly invisible one. Because of that, many angels have not attained a vision
of him, nor have the humans of the Hebrew people, of whom we have spoken—
that is, the righteous and the prophets. They thought nothing and said nothing
that came from illusion or imitation or from an obscure thought, but from the
power that was working in him, and being attentive to what he saw and heard,
each one of them spoke faithfully, with mutual harmony and concord after the
manner of the ones who were working in them, because they preserved their
<unity> and mutual harmony. This happened especially because they confessed
that which was superior to themselves, and that something greater than
themselves existed and had been established because they needed it. The
spiritual Word had produced this with them as something that was in need of that
which is superior, as a hope and anticipation deriving from remembrance. This is
the seed of salvation, and an illuminating word, which is the remembrance, and
its offspring and its emissions are the righteous and the prophets we have been
speaking about. They preserve the confession and the testimony of their fathers
concerning that which is great—those who came into being  with an
anticipation of hope, and with attentiveness, and in whom was sown <the> seed
of prayer and seeking, which is sown in many who have sought after
confirmation. It manifests itself, and leads them to love that which is higher, so
as to proclaim these things as being about the one and the same.
    A single influence was working in them when they spoke; what they saw and
spoke varied, however, because there were many who gave them their visions
and their speech. Therefore, those who have listened to what has been said do
not discard any of it, but have received the scriptures differently in their
interpretations. They have set up many sects that remain even until now among
the Jews. Some say that the god who made a proclamation in the ancient
scriptures is one; others say that they are many. Some say that God is simple and
that he was of a single mind as to his nature; others say that his actions embrace
the principles of both good and evil. Some again say that he is the maker of the
things that have come into being, whereas others say that  he made them
through [his] angels.

            The Prophecies Concerning the Savior (113, 1–114, 30)
Now, as to the many speculations of this kind, it is the great variety and the
multiple forms of the scriptures that have given them <…> teacher<s> of the
law. The prophets, however, spoke nothing from themselves, but each of them
from what he saw and heard of the proclamation about the Savior. That which he
proclaimed, and which was the main point of their proclamation, was what he
spoke about the coming of the Savior, namely, the fact of his coming.
Sometimes, however, the prophets speak about him as if he is to come into
being, while at other times as if the Savior is speaking through their mouths,
saying that the Savior will come and show grace toward those who have not
known him. Thus, by no means did they all agree with one another in their
testimony; rather, each one of them thought, by virtue of the activity by which he
was empowered to speak about him and the station that he had happened to see,
that over there was the place where the Savior would be born, and that he would
come from that place. Consequently, none of them understood where he would
come from or by whom he would be born. Instead, they were granted to say only
this: he would be born and would suffer. As for his preexistent being, however,
and that which he is, eternally, as unborn and impassible <…> not of the Word
that came to be in the flesh —that did not enter their thoughts.
    And this is the word they were empowered to speak concerning his flesh that
would appear. They say that it is something born from all of them, but above all
that it derives from the spiritual Word, which is the cause of the things that came
into being. He, from whom the Savior received his flesh, had indeed conceived
him, in a seminal form, at the revelation of the light, as a word giving promise of
his revelation; it <is>, in fact, <a> seed of those who are, though it was produced
last. The one, however, whom the Father appointed so as to reveal the salvation
through him, and who is the fulfillment of the promise, having been, when
descending into life, provided with all the instruments needed for his descent—
his father is one, and this is his only true father, who is invisible, unknowable,
and unattainable in his nature, and who is also the god who, by his will alone,
and his grace, let himself be seen, known, and attained.

                        The Incarnation (114, 30–115, 23)
What our Savior became, out of willing compassion, is the same as that which
the ones for whose sake he appeared had become because of an involuntary
passion: they had become flesh and soul, and this holds them perpetually in its
grip, and they perish and die. Those, however, who had [come into being
as] an invisible human being, and invisibly, them he instructed about himself in
an equally invisible manner. For not only did he assume their death for the ones
he had in mind to save, but in addition he also assumed their smallness, to which
they had descended when they were <born> with body and soul; for he let
himself be conceived and he let himself be born as a child with body and soul.
All the other conditions as well that they, even if they possessed the light, shared
with the ones who had fallen, he entered into, though he was exalted above
them because he let himself be conceived without sin, pollution, or defilement.
He was born into life, and he was in life, because it had been ordained that the
former no less than the latter should become body and soul as a consequence of
the passion and the aberrant sentiment of the Word that had moved.

                 The Incarnation of the Spiritual Seed Together
                       with the Savior (115, 23–117, 8)
He, however, assumed, for the sake of the economy, that which resulted from the
events we told about earlier—that which came into being from the radiant vision
and the stable thought of the Word after he had turned himself around, after his
movement. In this way those who came with him received body and soul
together with stability, firmness, and discernment. It had been planned that they
too should come when the coming of the Savior was planned; they came,
however, only after he had decided it. So they came, they too being far superior
in their carnal emission compared to the ones who had been brought forth from
deficiency.  For in [this] way they too were emitted bodily together with the
Savior by being manifested in union with him.
    These are such as belong to the single substance, and that is the spiritual one.
The economy, however, is variable, this being one thing, that another. Some
have issued from passion and division; they need healing. Others derive from a
prayer that the sick be healed; they have been appointed to care for those who
have fallen. These are the apostles and the bringers of good tidings. They are, in
fact, the disciples of the Savior: they are teachers for those who need instruction.
    Why, then, did they too partake of those sufferings that those who had been
brought forth from passion shared in, if, in accordance with the economy, they
were brought forth in one body together with <the> Savior, who did not partake
of these sufferings? Now, the Savior in fact was a bodily image of something
unitary, namely the All. Therefore he preserved the model of indivisibility, from
which is derived impassibility. They, however, are images of each of those who
were revealed; for that reason they receive the division from their model, having
been given form for that planting which exists down below, and which also
partakes of the evil that exists in the regions to which they have arrived. For the
Will kept the All under sin, in order that by Will he might show mercy on the All
and they might be saved, because a single one has been appointed to give life,
whereas all the rest need salvation.

                 The Proclamation of Salvation (117, 8–118, 14)
Because of this, he was the first one among them to whom it was granted to
distribute those gifts that were then proclaimed by the ones he found worthy of
making a proclamation to the others. Because <the> seed of the promise about
Jesus Christ had been deposited, whose revelation and unification we have
ministered to, this promise now enabled instruction and a return to that which
they had been from the beginning—that of which they possessed a drop inciting
them to return to it—which is what is called redemption.
    And that means to be released from captivity and to obtain freedom. The
captivity is of those who were slaves of ignorance, which reigned in its own
territories. Freedom, however, is the knowledge of the truth, which existed
before ignorance came into being and which reigns eternally without beginning
and without end; it is goodness, the healing of all things, the release from the
slave nature in which those suffered who had been brought forth in a lowly and
vain thought, the nature that inclines toward evil  owing to that thought,
which drags them down into the lust for power. They acquired that treasure
which is freedom, from the abundant grace that looks to the children but
overthrows passion and brings to naught the things that had been caused by the
Word. He had already rejected them at the moment when he separated them from
himself, but he had postponed their destruction until <the> end of the economy,
allowing them to exist because they too were useful for the things that had been
ordained.

              The Three Kinds of Human Beings (118, 14–119, 27)
Now, humanity came to exist as three kinds with regard to essence—spiritual,
psychical, and material—reproducing the pattern of the three kinds of
disposition of the Word, from which sprung material, psychical, and spiritual
beings. The essences of the three kinds can each be known from its fruit. They
were nevertheless not known at first, but only when the Savior came to them,
shedding light upon the saints and revealing what each one was.
     The spiritual kind is like light from light and like spirit from spirit. When its
head appeared, it immediately rushed to it. At once it became a body for its head.
It received knowledge straightaway from the revelation.
     The psychical kind, however, being light from fire, tarried before
recognizing  the one who had appeared to it, and still more before rushing
to him in faith. Though it was instructed, moreover, only by means of voice,
<it> was content that in this way it was not far from the hope given by the
promise, having received, in the form, as it were, of a pledge, the assurance of
things to come.
     The material kind, however, is alien in every respect: it is like darkness that
avoids the shining light because it is dissolved by its manifestation. For it did not
accept his <coming>, and is even <…> and filled with hatred against the Lord
because he revealed himself.
    Now, the spiritual kind will receive complete salvation in every respect. The
material kind will perish in every respect, as happens to an enemy. The psychical
kind, however, since it is in the middle by virtue of the way it was brought forth
as well as by virtue of its constitution, is double, being disposed to good as well
as to evil, and the issue that is reserved for it is uncertain <…> and to proceed
wholly into the things that are good.

            The Various Fates of Psychical People (119, 28–122, 12)
On the one hand, those that the Word brought forth in his mind after the model
of what was preexistent, when he remembered that which is superior and prayed
for salvation, have salvation without any uncertainty. They will be completely
saved, [because] of this saving thought, in accordance with what was produced
from it. This is also the case [with the ones] that these in turn brought forth,
 whether they be angels or humans: because they acknowledge that there is
something higher than themselves, and they pray and search for it, they will
obtain the same salvation as the ones who brought them forth. For they are of a
disposition that is good. They were assigned to the service of the proclamation of
the coming of the Savior before it happened as well as of his revelation after he
had come. Whether angel or human, these have, by the fact of being nominated
for this service, acquired the essence of their being.
    On the other hand, those that issued from the thought of lust for domination,
who originated from the assault of the ones who opposed him, are the products
of that thought. Being, for that reason, mixed, the end they will get is uncertain.
Those who rid themselves of the lust for domination that was given them
temporarily and for short periods, who give glory to the Lord of glory and who
abandon their rage, will be recompensed for their humility by being allowed to
endure indefinitely.
    Those, however, who arrogantly pride themselves in their vainglorious lust,
who love temporary glory, who are oblivious to the fact that the power they have
has been entrusted to them only for a limited time and period, and for that reason
have not acknowledged that the Son of God  is the Lord of the All and the
Savior, and who have failed to rid themselves either of their fury or their way of
imitating those who are evil—they will receive judgment for their ignorance and
their senselessness, namely, suffering.
    This applies to those who have gone astray, all those among them who turned
away or, even worse, who persisted in such a way that they too committed such
indignities against the Lord as the powers on the left committed against him,
even to the extent of causing his death, thinking, “We shall become the rulers of
the All if he who has been proclaimed king of the All is killed.” And those
humans and angels who do not originate from the good disposition of the ones
on the right, but from the mixture, endeavored to do this. They have willingly
chosen for themselves transient honor and lust.
    For those on the right who will be saved, the road to eternal rest leads from
humility to salvation. After having confessed the Lord, having given thought to
what is good for the Church, and having sung together with it the hymn of the
humble, they will, for all the good they have been able to do for it, sharing its
afflictions and sufferings like people who have consideration for what is good
for the Church, partake of the fellowship in hope. This applies  to humans
as well as to angels.
    Similarly, the road for those who are of the order of those on the left leads to
perdition—not only because they denied the Lord and plotted evil against him,
but also because their hatred, envy, and jealousy are directed against the Church
as well. And this is the reason for the condemnation of those who were agitated
and rose up to cause <trials> for the Church.

                    The Election and the Calling (122, 12–32)
The Election is consubstantial with the Savior and of one body with him.
Because of its oneness and union with him, it is like a bridal chamber. For more
than anything else it was for its sake that the Savior came. The Calling, on the
other hand, occupies the place of those who rejoice at the bridal chamber, who
are glad and happy on account of the union of the bridegroom and the bride.
Thus, the station that the Calling will have is the aeon of the images in the place
where the Word has not yet been united with the Fullness. And for this the
human being of the Church is glad, rejoices in it, and hopes for it; it was
composed of spirit, soul, and body on account of the economy of the Planner.

                  The Salvation of the Savior and of His Limbs
                               (122, 32–123, 22)
Now, the human inside him was a single one, for he was the All and he was all
of them, and he possessed what was flowing from the Father to the extent that
the various  stations were able to receive it. But he also possessed those
limbs that we have described above. Once the redemption had been proclaimed,
the perfect human immediately received knowledge so as to return swiftly to his
unity, to the place from which he came. Joyfully he returned back to the place
from which he had originated, the place from which he had flowed forth.
    His limbs, however, needed a school, such as exists in the regions that have
been so fashioned as to provide it with the likeness of the images and the
archetypes in the manner of a mirror, until all the limbs of the body of the
Church <would be united> in one place and would attain the restoration
together, by appearing as the sound body <…> the restoration to the Fullness.

                     The Final Restoration (123, 23–125, 24)
The Fullness possesses a first mutual concord and union, which is the concord
that exists for the glory of the Father, and through which the members of the All
acquire a representation of him. The final restoration, however, <will take place>
after the All is manifested in him who is the Son—the one who is the
redemption, who is the road toward the incomprehensible Father, who is the
return to the preexistent—and after the members of the All have been manifested
in him who is truly the inconceivable, ineffable,  invisible, and ungraspable
one, so that the All obtains its redemption.
     The redemption is not only a release from the domination <of> those on the
left, and not just an escape from the authority of the ones on the right, to each of
whom we thought we were slaves or children, and from whom nobody gets loose
without quickly becoming theirs once more. Rather, the redemption is also an
ascent and <…> those levels that exist in the Fullness and with all those who
have been given names and who comprehend them according to the capacity of
each individual aeon, and it is an entry into that which is silent, where there is no
need of voice, nor of understanding, comprehension, or illumination, but all
things are luminous and have no need of illumination.
     For not only earthly humans need the redemption, but the angels need the
redemption as well, and the image, and even the Fullnesses of the aeons and
those marvelous luminous powers needed it—so as to leave no doubt with regard
to anyone. And even the Son, who constitutes the type of the redemption of the
All, [needed] the redemption,  having become human and having submitted
himself to all that was needed by us, who are his Church in the flesh. After he,
then, had received the redemption first, by means of the word that came down
upon him, all the rest who had received him could then receive the redemption
through him. For those who have received the one who received have also
received that which is in him.
     For the redemption began [to be] given among the humans who were in the
flesh, with his firstborn and his love, the Son, coming in the flesh, and the
angels who were in heaven having been found worthy of forming a community,
a community in him upon the earth—for this reason it is called the Father’s
angelic redemption—and with him comforting those who had suffered on behalf
of the All for the sake of his knowledge, for he was given grace before anyone
else.

                      The Father’s Plan (125, 24–127, 25)
Now, the Father knew him in advance, since he existed in his deliberations
before anything had yet come into being, where he also had the ones for whom
he revealed him. He lay the deficiency upon that which lasts for limited periods
of time, for the glory of his Fullness. It is the fact that he was unknown that
made it possible for him to show his benevolence [by making himself known],
 and thus, receiving knowledge about him is a manifestation of his
generosity and the revelation of his abundant sweetness—which is the second
glory. Consequently, in this way he is, in fact, the cause of ignorance as well as
the originator of knowledge.
    In hidden and inscrutable wisdom he guarded the knowledge until the end,
until the members of the All would have labored in their search for God the
Father, whom no one has found by his own wisdom and power. And then he
grants them to attain knowledge of this great gift of his by means of that superior
thought and that method which he has given them and which consists in
ceaseless thanksgiving to him. Out of his immovable counsel, he then reveals
himself for eternity to the ones who have proved worthy of receiving, by his
will, the knowledge about the Father, who is unknowable in his nature.
    It was premeditated in the Father’s wisdom that the ones for whom he had
planned that they should attain knowledge, as well as all the good things that
come with it, should, in addition, also experience ignorance and its pains. Thus,
they would taste the things that are evil, and would be trained through them, as a
temporary…obtain the [enjoyment of the things that are good] for eternity.
The fact that they mark themselves out and are continually rejected and accused
by their adversaries is something they carry as an ornament and a marvelous sign
of the superior things. This was to make it evident that the ignorance of whoever
was ignorant of the Father was of his own making, whereas that which gave
them knowledge about him was a power from him enabling them to attain <it>.
    This knowledge is rightly described as “the knowledge of everything that can
be thought” and “a treasure.” And, to give more knowledge in addition to that, it
is also the revelation of the ones who were known in advance, and the road
toward the concord and the preexistent, which means that those acquire
greatness who have renounced the greatness that was theirs in the economy of
the Will, in order that the end may be just as the beginning was.

                            Baptism (127, 25–129, 34)
As for the true baptism, into which the members of the All descend and where
they come into being, there is no other baptism except the one—and that is the
redemption—which takes place in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
after confession of faith has been made in those names—[which] are the single
name of the good tidings —and after one has believed that the things one
has been told are real.
    And on account of this, whoever believes in their reality will obtain
salvation, and that means to attain, in an invisible way, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, but only after one has borne witness to them in unfaltering faith
and if one grasps them in a firm hope. In this way, it may happen that the
fulfillment of what one has believed becomes a return to them, and that the
Father becomes one with him—the Father, God, whom he has confessed in faith,
and who has granted him to be united with himself in knowledge.
    The baptism we have spoken about is called “the garment” <that> is not
taken off by the ones who put it on and that is worn by the ones who have
received redemption. And it is called “the confirmation of truth,” which never
fails in its constancy and stability and holds fast those who have obtained
<restoration> while they hold on to it. It is called “silence” because of its
tranquility and unshakability. It is also called “the bridal chamber” because of
the concord and the inseparability of the ones [whom] <he has> known <and
who> have known him. It is also [called]  “the unsinking and fireless
light,” not because it sheds light, but rather because those who wear it, and who
are worn by it as well, are made into light. It is also called “the eternal life,”
which means immortality.
    Thus it is called after all the fair things it contains, including the names that
have been <left out>, in a manner that is simple, authentic, indivisible,
irreducible, complete, and unchangeable. For how else can it be named, except
by referring to it as the All? That is, even if it is called by innumerable names,
they are spoken only as a way of expressing it in certain ways, although it
transcends all words, transcends all voice, transcends all mind, transcends all
things, and transcends all silence. This is how it is <…> with the things that
belong to what it is. This is what it in fact is, with an ineffable and inconceivable
character in order to be in those who have knowledge by means of what they
have attained, which is that to which they have given glory.
           The Salvation of Those Who Are Called (129, 34–136, 24)
Even if there are many more things that could be said on the subject of the
Election,  and which it would be fitting to mention, it is nevertheless
necessary that we <speak> once more about those who belong to the Calling—
for this is how those on the right are named—and it would not be profitable for
us to forget them. We have spoken about them as if the limited description above
was sufficient. How, then, is it that we have spoken only partially about them?
    Well, I said that all those who have gone forth from the Word, either from the
condemnation of the things that are evil, or from the rage that fought against
them, or the turning away from them, which is the conversion toward the
superior things, or the prayer and the remembrance of the preexistent things,
together with the hope and the faith that the salvation of that which is good
might be [obtained]—all these have become worthy, because they originate from
those good dispositions and they have as the cause of their birth a sentiment that
derives from that which is.
    Moreover, I said that before the Word himself had occupied himself with
them in an invisible manner, and willingly, that which was superior had also
supplied them with that thought which I mentioned above, because they had
been [obedient] to it,  and that thought was what became the cause of their
existence. And they did not exalt themselves because <they> were healed, as if
no one existed before them; rather, they acknowledge that they have an origin of
their existence, and they desire to know what that is that exists before them.
    In addition to that, I said that they greeted the light when it appeared in the
form of lightning, and they bore witness that it had appeared for their salvation.
    Now, not solely about those who came forth from the Word did we say that
they will attain that which is good, but the ones to whom these gave birth in turn
in accordance with those good dispositions will also partake of that repose, as a
consequence of the abundance of grace. And even those who were brought forth
from the desire of lust for domination, having inside them the seed that is lust for
domination, will receive the recompense of good things, if they have worked
together with those who are predisposed toward good things, and provided they
decide to do so deliberately, and are willing to abandon their vain love of
temporary glory so as to [do] the command of the Lord  of glory, and
instead of that small temporary honor they will inherit the eternal kingdom.
    It was necessary for us to return to what we had spoken about earlier; now,
however, we must join the premises thus laid down to the reasons and the
<evidence> as to whether all those on the right, whether unmixed or mixed, may
receive the grace of salvation and repose, so as to make a consistent argument.
This means that we shall establish, in a compelling discourse, a demonstration
from the form of their faith.
     If, in fact, we confess the kingdom in Christ, it is for the abolishment of all
diversity, inequality, and difference. For the end will regain the form of existence
of a single one, just as the beginning was a single one—the place where there is
no male and female, nor slave and free man, nor circumcised and uncircumcised,
nor angel and human, but all in all is Christ. How can one who did not exist at
first be found to come into being, unless <…> the nature of the one who is not a
slave, since he will take a place together with a  free man? For they will
even obtain direct vision, so that they will no longer have to believe on account
only of a small word produced by a voice that this is how things are.
     For the restoration back to that which was is a single one. Even if some are
exalted because of the economy, having been set up as causes for the things that
happened, unfolding numerous physical forces and taking pleasure in them,
[they]—angels [as well as] humans—will obtain the kingdom, the confirmation,
and the salvation.
     And here are the reasons. Those who had been revealed in the flesh believed
without hesitation that he was the son of the unknown God, the one that had not
been spoken about before and whom no one had been able to see. And they
abandoned the gods they had served before and the lords who are in heaven as
well as the ones on earth. Even before <he> had been taken up to heaven and
even when he was still a child, these bore witness that he had already begun to
preach. And when he lay in the tomb [as a] dead man, the angels thought that he
was alive, [and they received] life  at the hand of the one who had died.
     The many acts of worship and wonders they used to perform in the temples
these now gave over to another. The confession is what gave these the power to
do it, on account of their hastening toward him. That institution was something
they had gotten only so that they should renounce it for the sake of the one who
was not <shown honor> here below; but instead [they got] Christ, and they
understood that he came from the [superior] place, the place from [which] they
had come together with him, from a place divine and sovereign. The names that
the ones they had been worshiping, tending to, and serving had received on loan
they now gave over to the one who is truly called by them.
     Those, however, realized only after his assumption that he was their lord,
who has no lord over him. They then gave him their kingdoms, they rose [from
their] thrones, and they laid down their crowns. He, however, revealed himself to
them for the reasons we have mentioned before: that they might be healed and
[turn to] the good thought toward… friend and the angels…and the many
good things they have done for it. In this [way] they were entrusted with the
services that benefited the elect, as they brought the iniquity they suffered up to
heaven, to be eternally tried by the incontrovertible and infallible [judgment].
And they remain for their sake, until they have all entered into earthly life and
have passed out of it. As long as their bodies [remain] on the earth, they minister
to all their…, and make [themselves] partners in their afflictions, persecutions,
and tribulations, which have been brought upon the saints more than anyone
else.
     As for the servants of evil, however, since evil deserves destruction <…>
with firmness on account of that [communal life] which is above all the worlds,
and which is their good thought and friendship.
     And the Church will remember them as good friends and faithful servants
once it has been redeemed, and [it will give them] the reward consisting of the
joy that reigns in the bridal [chamber], and the…[which] is in its house…which
is in the thought…and that which it owes… Christ, who is with it [and the]
expectation of the Father [of] the All, and it will provide them with guiding and
serving angels.
     For the aeons will remember their benevolent thought with which they
served the Church, <and> will give them their reward [for] all their
consideration. This is an emission from them, in order that just as Christ…will,
which brought forth the great and exalted [things] for the Church and gave them
to it, <so> this emission too will become a thought for these and will provide
them with dwelling places where they will dwell eternally [after they have]
renounced the downward attraction of deficiency, and the power of the Fullness
has pulled them upward, on account of the great generosity and the sweetness of
the preexistent aeon.

                       The End of Time (136, 24–138, 27)
This is the nature of everything that was produced as a result of what [Christ]
had with him when he shone upon them [with] a [light] that revealed…as his…
which will be…just as his…the only difference [that] exists among those who
have been.......
    …those who are…by means of…value, in the way [I have] already
explained, while the material beings will be left behind until the end to perish,
for they will not give their…. If they have returned once more to that which…in
the way that they were…while they do not exist…, but they had been useful…
[for the] time that they were among them, even if they are not…at first, then…to
do something else by means of the power they had in the establishment [to]
oppose them.
    Even if I continue to make use [of] such words…his thoughts…
greatness.......
    …all…angel…words [through] the [sound of a] trumpet, which will
announce the great and complete reconciliation from the resplendent East, in the
bridal [chamber], which [is] the love of God, the…, in accordance with the
power that…of the greatness…the sweetness of his…, as he reveals himself to
the greatnesses…his goodness…the praise, the power, and the [glory], through
Jesus Christ, the Lord, the Savior, the Redeemer of all those who are embraced
by the mercy of love, and through [his] Holy Spirit, from now throughout all
generations forever and ever. Amen.
